[Music]
welcome to uncommon knowledge I'm Peter
Robinson shooting today in Fiesole
a town in the hills above Florence Italy
with me today three guests david
Berlinski is a philosopher mathematician
and author who has lived in Paris for a
couple of decades now and is now the
editor of inference the international
review of science
David Galanter is a professor of
computer science at Yale and the author
of a number of books including most
recently the tides of mind uncovering
the spectrum of consciousness Stephen
Meyer is a philosopher and author he
directs the center for science and
culture at the Discovery Institute a
think tank in Seattle here's what brings
us together in the Claremont Review of
Books this past spring
David Galanter published an essay titled
giving up Darwin quote Steven Myers
thoughtful and meticulous book Darwin's
doubt convinced me that Darwin has
failed the deniable Darwin and other
essays a book by David Berlinski is also
quote essential David kilometre David
Berlinski Steven Mayer welcome thank you
all right definitions Darwin's book is
on the Origin of Species and to quote
from David galera ters essay quote
there's no reason to doubt that Darwin's
successfully explained the small
adjustments by which an organism adapts
to local circumstances changes defer
density or wing style or beak shape yet
there are many reasons to doubt whether
he can explain the big picture not to
fine tuning of existing species but the
emergence of new ones closed quote okay
I'm a layman I know nothing
start by convincing me somebody that
you're not just defining the term
species to Darwin's disadvantage who
wants to take that with David
there really is very little disagreement
on the issue of what a species is and I
think it doesn't have to be a technical
term I think virtually any alert child
knows when he passes from one species of
pet creature to another species or what
cat yeah a cow or a sheep or something
like that this is part of our innate
view of the universe nobody wants to
define anything to Darwin's disadvantage
I think you're looking at three
scientists here and I think every one of
us has appreciated and is speaking only
for myself and I'd be surprised
appreciated the beauty of what Darwin
did it certainly was no joy to conclude
that Steve was right it was no joy for
me to to give up a beautiful theory and
was Immunization a beautiful aesthetic
so there's some things subjective about
it but explain that why did Darwin
strike he was beautiful uh you know
whatever yeah each year of my life I am
I am less convinced that there is
anything at all subjective about beauty
oh really
the fact that here we are in Florence
and every single person in the city
wants to see the Michelangelo so
portrait I mentioned to you and the
slaves in the academia and they and and
the great paintings in new feet see
people come from all over Asia people
come from Africa they come from all over
the world there's spectacularly little
disagreement I mean their disagreement
about theorems and topology also when
people say I believe the proof i don't
believe the proof there's disagreement
about everything in human life but i
think less about the greatest art than
about any other subject beauty is
something that i think scientists tend
to agree on to use as a pointer in the
direction of truth
Darwin's theory struck me as beautiful
insofar as it explains big things by
generalizing little things the you
mentioned the change in the density of
fur
creature with fur in the shape of the
beak of a bird or of a feather of their
bird Darwin can explain those things by
principles of natural selection and when
he says well we can go from these little
changes a beak is is is three inches as
opposed to three and a quarter inches we
can use the same mechanism that by which
we explain that to explain why there are
sheeps and cows why there are monkeys
and also orangutans and why that why
apes are different for a monkey's the
fact that we can explain this huge
question of where species came from the
Origin of Species using the same
mechanism that will work for tiny
variations in the fur of a sheep or the
beak of a bird if one aspect of what
makes the theory beautiful I mean other
people look at it from different just
quickly because I want to go into the
arguments against but is this did you
have the same response does Darwin
strike you as beautiful never for a
minute Stephen it was a comprehensive
synthesis and so from the standpoint of
what scientists look for it had an
appeal it was also well a well argued
book the Origin of Species but it was
well argued on the basis of evidence
that was known in the nineteenth century
and not things that we've learned mostly
from the 20th and 21st ok we come to
that now again from David giler enters
sa quote Darwinian the fossil record
problem one the fossil record Darwinian
evolution of quoting you is gradual step
by step yet in the Cambrian explosion of
around half a billion years ago a
striking variety of new organisms
including the first ever animals pop up
suddenly in the fossil record over a
mere 70 million years
close quote now 70 million years seems
to be plenty of time for all kinds of
surprising things to this layman explain
why is the Cambrian explosion such a
problem for the Cambrian explosion was
something that such a problem that it
even began to convince this man you know
it was a problem that even Darwin was
aware of and he wrote
in the Origin of Species it was
inexplicable on his view of of life and
but he felt that the future fossil finds
would fill in the missing ancestral
forms that were evident what happens in
the Cambrian is you get a huge number of
what are called the animal body plans
where a body plan is a unique
configuration of body parts and tissues
and they arrive very abruptly in the
fossil record without discernible
connection to earlier precursors or
earlier ancestors in the Precambrian
record if this wall were the side of a
canyon halfway up we'd see you have a
stripe of rock and in that stripe you'd
find a whole bunch of new forms of
animal life and then during the layers
underneath there would be no
intermediate they're not leading with
any just turnable connection right and
so the Cambrian explosion itself has
been differently dated but increasingly
the the date that David use of 70
million years is a very generous state
for the the age range is actually
narrowing as a result of additional
findings it's now about 10 million years
as the increasingly accepted date and
there are major explosion in one Chinese
seam there's 13 to 16 different major
groups of animals that have arisen in a
5 to 6 million or window it's it's
incredibly abrupt geologically when you
consider the age of the earth the four
and a half billion years it's also very
abrupt biologically because there is a
mathematical branch of Darwinian theory
called population genetics that allows
us to calculate how much how much change
evolutionary change we ought to expect
in a given amount of time if we know
things like the mutation rate the
generation time regulation sizes and 5
10 even 70 million years is a blink of
an eye in terms of those the
calculations that can be made or for
what are called waiting times and the
expected waiting times for the amount of
change that's evident in the Cambrian
blowout the timescale if you will
they're hundreds of millions or billions
of years so this is a really unexpected
event both biologically mathematically
and geologically on a Darwinian view of
things all right back to David Gill
Aaron tour we moved from the fossil
record I'm coming to you go nowhere I'm
patient up thank you David Galera
main problem is molecular biology now
this is complicated to me but I'm going
to continue quoting your essay and then
ask somebody to unpack it for this
layman here for this layman who can't
tell a cat from a dog apart the the
species I'm I'm gonna treat me as a very
slow student quoting what I'm quoting
you what does generating new forms of
life entail many biologists agree that
generating a new shape of protein is the
essence of it this argument step number
one argument step number two and
inventing a new protein means inventing
a new gene you might have give me the
the overview on that one Steve is the
real biologist life means new life new
form of life means new protein means new
gene well I'll explain it in terms that
would be familiar today but if you want
to give a computer a new function right
a new program for it to accomplish a new
function you've got to give it new code
and the big discovery of 20th century
biology following Watson and Crick and
what's now called the molecular
biological revolution is the same thing
as true in life you want to invent a new
form of life you've got to have you've
got to have code in the form of the
information inscribed along the spine of
the DNA molecule and we're learning and
other forms of information so you need
the information to build the the protein
molecules that serviced the different
types of cells and then you need
additional information to arrange the
cells into the body plants and so the
the Cambrian explosion is an explosion
of biological form but it's also an
explosion of biological information and
that fact gives us a way of grappling
with this question that Darwin didn't
have because we know something about
what it takes to generate information in
our high-tech digital world of computing
right I know I have to say that David
Gill enter in his essay goes very easy
on Darwin first he calls the theory
beautiful and says how sad he is to have
to dismiss it and then he says this
molecular stuff Darwin couldn't have
known that but nobody
so if tell me if you tell me if I've got
it more or less right in Darwin's time
it was good enough to imagine that the
basic unit of life a cell was like a
little brick of jell-o it was an
undifferentiated quite uncomplicated
thing and you could imagine putting many
many many of them together into getting
different forms of life is that roughly
fair you know is good enough for Darwin
it's probably good enough for us as well
but it's not true it's that's the big
problem this cell is an unbelievably
complex bit of machinery unfathomably
complex and we haven't understood its
complexity at all every time we look
there seems to be an additional layer of
Rabaul bit of complexity that needs to
be factored in to our theories don't
forget the the the eternal goal is to
explain the emergence of this complexity
yes
and if we're continually behind the
curve because the complexity is
increasing every time we look that
eternal goal is also receding from you
not approaching it's receding it's
becoming more and more difficult to
construct a theory for that all right
now somebody give me some notion of the
math here things are more complicated
than Darwin knew we understand that
producing new forms of life now means
not just new shapes new activities in
which life engages but a prior code or
is that fair you're the you're the man
you mate you know the the mathematical
element of this not of population
genetics in in the complex sophisticated
predictive sense that si was referring
to but just the simple issue of the code
it is remarkable for young people learn
in high school is remarkable for me or
an elementary school to learn that
proteins molecules are assembled because
there are codes there are codes in the
nucleus of cells that spell them out
character by character codon by codon
this codon means this amino acid and the
next one means that and the next one
means that but the but the mathematics
the mathematics underlying these codons
is very simple and
then Darwin could perfectly well have
understood if he had the facts each one
of these positions has to be occupied by
one of 20 amino acids okay so you picked
one of 20 guys for this position and one
of 20 guys for this position my talk
about visualizing a string of B yeah
like as you're building a protein or
different colored beads roughen build on
building a protein out of amino acids
yes and and I'm doing it by choosing the
amino acids one by one by one by one by
one
yeah and I have 20 choices each time now
if there are several hundred of these
things in the string in the bead in the
necklace it's a big nut and necklace
that wraps around your neck 18 times so
there are several hundred like five
times whatever it is that's a huge
number of possible choices the number of
ways in which you can arrange the
Emerald followed by the Ruby followed by
the opal followed by the tunngle
Platinum and another Ruby in another
Ruby and a diamond and a aquamarine the
number of ways you can arrange that is
huge grows exponentially as this as the
string gets longer so even when the
string is short even if it's a cheap
necklace for your very first girlfriend
and so you can afford it's still there's
an astronomical number of choices and
Darwin could easily have computed that
he just didn't know about the amino
acids he didn't know about the necklace
he didn't know about the string it's not
the mathematics that stumped him it's
the biology the mathematics is simple a
high school student can compute how many
choices there are if there are 20 gems
for position number one and twenty gems
or position number two and you have 60
gems altogether and the task here you're
trying to mute you so I'm quoting from
your - you can even though I got it you
got it right I'm David this David
Olinsky has a memorable phrase going to
describe this mathematical problem he
calls it the problem of combinatorial
inflation yes yes of length the required
length of the pro
molecule grows the numbers grow
exponentially they inflate exponentially
and so that the the odds of a random
search finding the the the one that
makes the pretty necklace to use right
other metaphor dropped precipitously and
in this huge unimaginably vast universe
of possible combinations the number of
combinations that would produce a useful
protein is what they are exceedingly
rare exceedingly rare and this is what
we didn't know until the last just the
last couple decades there was an
extraordinary conference in the 1960s
held by convened by a number of MIT
scientists some of whom David knew very
well Murray Eden Marsha
Martin burger and they were the first to
see the mathematical problem with
Darwinism they called it their
conference was called mathematical
challenges to neo-darwinism but at the
time they could compute the number of
possible arrangements but they didn't
know at the time how many of the
arrangements would result in functional
proteins that would do a job in the cell
and so they didn't know they couldn't
exactly measure how hard this search was
would be on a random random basis the
especially the computer scientist Marie
Eden and others knew that based on
computer science if this is functioning
like a true linguistic system it's going
to be it's like
unlikely that you can do a random search
and find a meaning a meaningful string
of characters in DNA that will produce a
meaningful protein ok but people didn't
know in in the 1960s by that by early
2000s there been a number of different
experimental measures of the rarity of
the functional genes and proteins versus
all the gibberish sequences right and
for a short fruit for example just one
result for a short protein 150 amino
acids long the ratio is one protein that
will fold into a a functional structure
for it compared to 10 to the 77th
jibberish sequences so the ratio of
functional to non-functional is 1 over
10 to the 77th power
okay so functioning proteins are
extremely rare
it's very hard to imagine random
mutations leading to functional proteins
except that and here I quote dr. Gill
errant her again but the theory
understands that mutations are rare and
successful ones even scarcer
Darwinism knows this to balance that out
there are many organisms and a
staggering immensity of time your
chances of winning might be
infinitesimal but if you play the game
often enough you win in the end
correct that's the question do you play
it often enough there's always an often
enough and the question is does the
history of life with which Darwin was
concerned allow you enough chances to
make it at all probable let's say or
even possible that you'll hit on what
statistically that you'll hit on one of
those amazingly rare necklaces that
folds up into a protein that can be
stuck in a Cell on actually doing doing
anything I'm not a biologist and so I
look at this and say yeah there ain't
sure there's enough time you know
there's been a lot of creatures on earth
and life is going on for a long time but
when biologists look at this and try and
nail it down and figure it out try and
make it guess Chinese heuristics to make
a guess like using the number of total
bacterial lifetime as a measure of the
number of total mutations we're playing
with the point is from whatever angle
you come out it the the answer is no
there has not been enough time the the
number of throws we've had is too puny
even to talk about doesn't even approach
pew ninis and certainly is nowhere near
reasonable so so we would get that if we
had a reasonable time but we don't we
didn't we have it so let me just be very
explicit from my little Winnie the Pooh
Bear sized mind you are saying you are
saying that Darwin is unlikely to have
to be able it's unlikely that species
arose the way Darwin said or you are
saying it is impossible Darwin was just
mr. lovely man
beautiful idea is hardly a difference it
is hardly a difference unlikely and plus
we're talking about odds that are so
prohibitum if you wish to say it's
impossible fine I'll defend you saying
it's impossible if you wish to say it's
highly unlikely I'll be in your corner
as defense attorney as well but there's
no practical difference it's look like
we've known it justice things for
hundreds of years
I had a million monkeys at a million
typewriters all of them typing at random
we know they're not going to produce the
collected works of Shakespeare anything
like a reasonable amount of time it's
like that wonderful episode of The
Simpsons do you remember if mr. burns
has a million monkeys typing in a
million typewriters they're going to
produce the greatest novel ever written
he pulls out one sheet of paper and it
was the best of times it was the worst
of times it was the best of times it was
the worst of times
stupid stupid monkey to put the
discussion down even lower the Jim
Carrey film where he's trying to get a
date with a young lady he fancies and
she tells him to go away he says well
what are they what are the odds a girl
like me and a guy like you could get
together not good he says what do you
mean not good like one in a hundred and
she's like one in a million and then he
says well but if there's a chance here's
a precise way of yes of cashing out this
probabilistic argument if you have 1
over 10 to the 77th power as your ratio
but then you have all if every organism
in the history of the planet and we can
estimate that about 10 to the 40th
organisms so you define bacteria a
little tiny bacterium yeah every time
one of those replicates there's a
possibility for a mutation that could
search the space of possibilities so
you've got 10 to the 40th possible
mutations against a search space 10 to
the 77th strong right so if you do your
exponential math you end up with you can
what it means is you can search 110
trillion trillionth 110 trillion
trillion trillionth of the possible
combinations so in that case are you
more like
to succeed or fail you're overwhelmingly
more likely to fail to find one of the
functional combinations even taking into
account every organism that's lived on
earth and that's that that means that
the the are winning hypothesis so
overwhelmingly more likely to be false
than true it just didn't happen okay one
last piece of the argument here that you
mentioned there are other pieces in this
book of course and in David's book but
here's one last word that you mentioned
in your essay is compelling to you David
Gilliland er to help create a brand new
and this is the the question mute
mutations proving harmful at least as
often as useful if I have it right to
help create a brand new form of organism
a mutation must affect a gene that does
its job early and in the development of
the life form and the controls the
expression of other genes that come into
play as the organism grows evidently
there are total of no examples in the
literature of mutations that affect
early development and the body plan as a
whole and are not fatal somebody explain
that one to me briefly who wants you
start in Stephen if I'm if if I want to
direct the Assembly of an animal that
I've got to get in there early before
they've finished putting them together
putting all the you know the hoofs on
and getting the wool on he's a sheep I
like sheep I have to say you know I have
to get in there early before they start
building them so they don't accidentally
build a mouse or a leopard or or a zebra
I have some say look there's only sheep
get bones this I and we need a nose
about this big and we need cheap ears
and we need to if she passes we need
wool you know get all this stuff
together so I've got to act early now if
I'm going to now if I'm going to create
a new species I'm going to mutate and
instead of building a sheep I'm going to
build a little horse because horses come
in cheap size what are they called
well anyway Shetland ponies I got to do
that
there may be a mutation that makes me
order purple wool or or the wrong color
hooves or a stomach that won't quite fit
but a mutation that is going to recreate
the creature in such a way that it's a
different creature is biologists tell me
in Forrest County almost certainly
likely to be fatal
I mean they're a that makes a huge
difference and that starts putting the
head on backwards
it starts starts giving him 17 tails or
or too many internal organs or fur gets
the blood or something like that because
this is right early on that I'm acting
when I'm doing tremendously important
things and if I make a slip at this
all-important stage not gonna make a
little error in the density of the fur
it's gonna be a big error in the design
of the internal of the external that
makes its creature what it is that's a
that's an informal report David a good
argumentative disjunction if you talk
about major changes if they come late in
development they're not gonna make a
difference the the organism is already
constructed may have no Shriver eyes
okay if they come early they can't make
a difference because inevitably they
destroy the organism too many things
downstream depend on those early cell
divisions so what we're faced with a
real destructive dilemma late no good
early no good
well when we've sort of exhausted the
possibilities and I'm sure the David
Lerner wants to stick up for Darwin one
more time and say he couldn't have known
this this is not an attack on Darwin as
a man or a thinker or a scientist but
it's the job of signs to figure out what
guesses are right and what are wrong
scientists are paid for making guesses
not for making right guesses but for
making interest in plausible ones and if
scientists after after the guest has
been made don't do their job don't
investigate the gas don't do their best
to figure out is it true or false then
we are false to science and we're
betraying sign
intelligent design from david gilliland
news essay the evidence suggests Stu
Meyer who's seated with us today that an
intelligent designer must have been
responsible
I can't accept intelligent design as
Meyer presents it close quote
you also have seated next to you David
Berlinski who has been who his missus
David who has said that his attitude
toward intelligent design and I'm
quoting him is warm but distant it's the
same attitude that I displayed toward my
ex-wives so so you have one man who
can't accept it another man who
definitely wants to keep his distance
I'd leave Meyer out so so well I don't
know you want to start the easier case
try to convince David tell us what tell
us what intelligent design is that
distinguishes it from some kind of
effort to sneak God in by some backdoor
sure the intelligent design apparently
just one word that's definitely not
Steve's intention in in this book in
intelligent design it's not a way to
bring in a theological argument it is a
scientific approach purely and
absolutely valid scientifically one can
agree with it or disagree with it but
one doesn't have to reject it insofar
its theology making an illegal move cuz
that's not what that's not what you good
let me sketch the arguments truthfully
and then we can just discuss it the the
big discovery of the 1950s and 60s was
that the DNA molecule encodes
information in a roughly digital or
alphabetic or typographic form this way
to use the term digital well because in
computer science we have characters you
know zeros and ones this was this is
Crick 1957 is the sequence hypothesis he
realized that that the information in
DNA or the the chemical subunits of DNA
called nucleotide bases were functioning
like alphabetic characters in a written
text or like the zeros and ones in a
section of computer code that is to say
it's not it wasn't their chemical
properties that gave them their function
but rather their specific arrangement in
accord with an independent symbol
convention which was later explicate
'add in the form of what we call the
genetic code
we had genetic text functioning
according to a code so it really was a
pure it was it was pure information but
this is a genuine information storage
system Creek by the way was a Code
Breaker in World War two so there's a
fascinating is application of the
information science system molecular
biology now what we and this is the
argument that I make is that what we
know from experience is that information
whether we find it in a hieroglyphic
inscription or a paragraph in a book or
information embedded in a radio signal
or in a section of computer code
whenever we find information and we
trace it back to its ultimate source we
always come to a mind not a material
process and what I do in the book in
Darwin's doubt and my prior book
signature in the cell is show that these
undirected evolutionary mechanisms that
have been proposed as an explanation for
the origin of information fail for
various reasons we've talked about the
reason that Darwinian mechanism fails
because it can't search the space when
it's so vast that the odds are
overwhelmingly against it so if we from
a materialistic evolutionary standpoint
don't have any explanation for the
origin of the information that's
necessary to build new biological form
and yet we do know from our uniform and
repeated experience which is the basis
of all scientific reasoning of a source
of information of a cause of the origin
of information that that causes
intelligence or mind and so what I've
argued in both Darwin's doubt and
signature in the cell is that what we're
seeing in life is evidence of the
activity of a directing mind in the
history of life David Berlinski to quote
the old saying if you see a turtle on a
fence post you know it didn't get there
by itself look around you there's
intelligence behind this creation we
inhabit yes that's an easy one for a man
like you yes I guess you're not leaving
me much to chew with much you are a
contrary man what do you mean I don't
know I mean look intelligence in the
world intelligence behind the world I'm
relying really why this subjection
whatever he comes up with you you're
going to be the one who answers so
you're meanest kisses at famine prices
it doesn't really in my point from my
point of view it doesn't really give us
much it's not yet a theory I'm certainly
ought to say there's a lot of
intelligence manifest in the world but
at the same time I think that doesn't
really look the technology to you look
at this it's information yes its
information that's pretty good yeah
that's pretty good yeah it's information
I recognize that information of some
loose sense maybe Shannon since maybe a
more elegant formulation of information
theory but I'm much more persuaded by
something that leads to a strong
counterintuitive claim for example that
the information is embedded in a
topology in a certain way that makes it
inevitable that certain life forms will
emerge that would be an interesting
conclusion and for a time I thought
there was such a a mathematical
construction I don't think my confidence
was entirely well-founded but it was a
good idea but just to say that the world
is charged with the grandeur of God I
could have said that before thinking
about biology it is that's true David
Gill Aaron I'm quoting your essay again
if there was an intelligent designer
what was his strategy how did he manage
to back himself into so many corners
wasting energy on so many doomed
organisms what was his purpose and why
did he do such a slip slip shod job why
are we so disease prone heartbreak prone
and so on close quote what aren't you
setting a pretty high state aren't you
saying in effect either Steven Mayer can
explain all the mysteries of the human
heart or he's not allowed to say
anything that is to say the difference
between a purely materialistic view that
all that we see around us came about
purely as a matter of chance and Stevens
view that there is intelligence however
little we can say about it however
little we understand what we mean by
that that's still a fundamental finding
the question is whether the world around
us that you're pointing at meets your
standard of intelligence whether whether
the design that we see is in fact an
intelligent design or a total mess when
I look at the world at large
I see a mess when I look at the mind of
man I see a worse mess I see a creature
as likely to do bad is good or more
likely I see many creatures who were who
were fated to die out without leaving
any contribution that we can associate
with value not even becoming oil or
something like that
I don't look at I don't look at the
world as we know it as more likely the
result of intelligence than random
playing around then just random taking
your chances think of you took your
chances you you'd come up with a mess
like the world you'd have some lucky
breaks there's some really great people
there are some beautiful cities like
Florence they're all sort of Elijah lay
down in the valley there are wonderful
things but on the whole I would fail
this world if I were grading it and this
is an important point in the Talmud by
the way I won't magnate there's a famous
argument between base and base ah my two
schools of thought who are who lived at
the same time famous for disagreeing
about everything one of them was a lot
like David but and but there's only one
there's only one question on which they
ever agreed and that question was is it
good that the earth was created is a
good thing the universe was created is
it is it is it is it good that it
happened and Hillel says and Shammai
agrees with him no it's a catastrophe if
we had to go back and do it all again
how to tell the almighty don't do it the
suffering outweighs that go all right
Stephen so they fit in intelligent
design it wasn't that intelligent I have
looked at a little differently I see two
things when I look at nature I see
evidence of design Aboriginal design and
regional meaning from the beginning in
different in different groups of
organisms from bakeneko but you also see
evidence of decay and that's also
something that's consistent with what
when designers make things then there's
this thing we call entropy
and I think here a theological
perspective does help because I think
you from the judeo-christian perspective
you would expect to see both evidence of
original creation or original design but
you would also expect to see that
something's gone wrong in nature as well
and I think we see both so my
theological perspective does inform my
ability to answer that question about
the things in nature that don't look so
well it's interesting for example the
problem of virulent bacteria you know
nasty nasty bugs they are there they are
invariably the result of a loss of
information as a result of the
mutational process so the very process
that the Darwinists have invoked to
explain the origin of good design is
actually I think responsible for the
evidence of decay so I think there's a
the this is the question in philosophy
known as the theodicy you know yes yes
the problem and so I think there's ways
of thinking about that but but but for
me the the evidence of design is
powerful it's ubiquitous in in both in
life and at the level of physics of
things like the fine-tuning of the laws
and constants of physics so I I say very
powerful signal design but I don't deny
the decay and the suffering in the world
and I have a theological way of
understanding if the if the if the the
bad viruses are always a result of a
defect that fits the theology perfectly
with the theology suggests that good is
the entity evil has no independent
existence it's always a defect or a
shortcoming and the good right isn't
that right I think it does fit and and
there's a quite a lot of microbiology
that actually supports that that
viewpoint but back to you dr. Gill Eric
there what are two of the great Jewish
minds in history doing saying the
creation is bad when the beginning of
the Hebrew Scripture is God saw that it
was good we depart after Darwin just a
bit but again is this I can't resist
that one it's it's absolutely true that
that he saw that it was good and both of
the two creation stories agreed that the
that that the world is a good thing and
yet immediately as far as the Bible is
concerned men start screwing it up from
from Adam and Eve to Cain and Abel to
Noah and his ark to these stories of the
patriarchs and the and the world in
which they lived to Moses who leads
Israel to the promised land and the
people are a bitch they're constantly
fighting arguing struggling being a
nuisance in every conceivable way so it
God creates a perfect world on the other
hand he hasn't created a perfect
creature that's why we are obligated to
study and struggle study the good and
try to struggle in that direction but I
you know I want to say I have no feel
article argument with with Steve what I
my argument is with people who dismiss
intelligent design without considering
it it seems to me it's widely dismissed
in my world of academia as some sort of
theological put up job it's an
absolutely serious scientific argument
in fact it's the first and most obvious
and intuitive one that comes to mind
it's got to be dealt with intellectually
not not by the bigotry and religious
bigotry which is one of the most
important facts of the intellectual
world the United States the West
generally okay you know the case for
intelligent design is not based on you
know we can have a theological
discussion as we've had a bit here but
the case for intelligent design isn't an
interpretation or a deduction from the
scriptural text right it's an inference
from biological evidence and in that
sense it's different there's makes that
assertion and you say yep he's being
honest about that and anybody can show
not only that but I think it's an
important assertion because outside the
scientific world one might not know how
ideologically bent the world of science
parts of the world of science are
becoming I I say it with real sorrow and
it's certainly not true of every
scientist or even a most scientist but
we have a cautionary tale in what
happened to our English departments and
our history departments it could happen
to us
all right Congress I think might sort of
my last round of questions here I'm
going to quote you once again David Gill
errant nur
Darwinism is no longer just a scientific
theory but the basis of a world view and
an emergency religion for the many
troubled souls who need one close quote
now lots of people have invested lots of
energy in discrediting dr. Berlinski and
dr. Maier over the years you dr. gallant
nur are a professor of unquestioned
competence and achievement in computer
science and computer science is with it
baby it is right at the middle of the
new world we're creating it's
technocracy we don't have to ask
ultimate questions we just have to deal
with zeros and ones
it's totally rational it's producing a
cornucopia of new wealth and now goal in
there goes over to the other side he's
done with us all along so what's the
reception being greater at New Haven and
in your profession in academia I mean
that's a serious question what's going
ok I have to make a distinction between
the way I've been treated personally
which isn't a very courteous inclusion
wet by my colleagues at Yale there are
nice guys and I like them there they're
my friends on the other hand when I look
at their intellectual TA they're what
they publish and much more important
what they tell their students
[Music]
Darwinism has indeed passed beyond a
scientific argument as far as they are
concerned you take your life in your
hands to challenge it intellectually
yeah they will destroy it if you
challenge it now I haven't been
destroyed I'm not a biologist and you
know I don't claim to be an authority on
this topic but and you know a book
review is not the same as a book it's
it's desert of a satellite around the
book anyway it remains a case that I
have nothing personally to charge my
colleagues with but what I've seen in
their behavior intellectually and it
colleges across the West is nothing
approaching free speech on this topic is
a bitter rejection not
a sort of bitter fundamental angry
outraged violent rejection which comes
nowhere near scientific or intellectual
discussion I've seen that happen again
and again I'm a Darwinism don't you say
a word against it or will or I don't
want to hear you period which proves
that you're attacking their religion in
effect I am attacking our religion and I
don't blame them for being all head up
it is a big issue for them
unquestionably dr. Berlinski who holds
his doctorate in philosophy I wanted to
part this isn't strictly Darwin but it's
I'm indulging myself this is a quotation
that has struck me as compelling for a
long time but for a long time I thought
I really want to try it on Berlinski so
here we go okay try I'll try you.this is
CS lewis granted that reason is prior to
matter I can understand how men should
come to know a lot about the universe
they live in if on the other hand I
swallow the scientific cosmology and for
scientific cosmology we may as well read
the Darwinian theory of evolution if I
swallow the scientific cosmology then
not only can I not fit in religion but I
cannot even fit in science here we go
here's the ears to pay off on this if
minds are wholly dependent on brains and
brains on biochemistry and biochemistry
on the meaningless flux of the atoms I
cannot understand how the thought of
those Minds should have any more
significance than the sound of the wind
in the trees close quote he's on to
something there isn't he isn't the
existence of isn't consciousness the
first question we have to answer not
mine
totally wrong just it's not even the
first question I would think of asking
why does it seem so very compelling to
you or CS Lewis business yeah it's one
of those things it's certainly true that
I'm conscious I have my doubts about you
and and these two guys here but those
doubts really don't matter
whole lot I'm prepared to welcome my
friends as automata he mattered to me he
he's not onto a point or he's onto
something that's just uninteresting I'm
not sure I understand the point I mean
let's say does this make any sense to
you expense to me this is this is what
bothered Thomas Nagel no and well he's
become a skeptic of neo-darwinism is
that mines are real things and if you
can't give an account of where they came
from or what they do that isn't itself
self-defeating then you end up in a in a
really incoherent ok tell us the goal
Aaron or to break the tie because his
latest book was on consciousness I have
I have to agree and the question of
consciousness is unsolved
you can argue whether it's important or
not I think I think most people
intuitively believe it's important I
think they're right
but the the question of the origins of
life and the organs of consciousness are
the intellectual bookends of modern
science and philosophy and we can't say
much about either of them
we can't characterize either of them and
if we can't characterize them we're not
really in a position to explain how they
emerged that seems to me a prior
commitment to be able to say what we
wish to explain someone says I'm deeply
puzzled about consciousness but
everybody says that that's a very
fashionable thing they say in teen vogue
for heaven's sakes but I would like to
have a better sense of what is prompting
the puzzlement I don't have that I can't
sit in your seat when you're sitting
there so I can't experience your
sensations when you're having them Wow
all right so what why is that
intelligible from a scientific or a
philosophical point of view as a
pressing issue if you say most of your
friends happen to be automata we'll turn
you into an automata and you'll get a
$50 coupon right now where you can spend
in Florence would you accept the deal or
not 50 bucks my consciousness yeah for
coming in
oh you're mr. Floyd well but now you're
just dickering over the price yeah
exactly
but that's true of all intellectual
discussions we're always talking about
the price the price seems to me very low
to be puzzled there are lots of things
that are puzzling in the world some of
them we understand some of them we don't
but we follow you your consciousness at
least at $50 yeah $50 at least you've
established a floor we can go up from
there we're all saying it's a mystery
but we're framing the mystery in there
that's exactly right it's a puzzle I
don't even I'm not even persuaded it's a
mystery in the sense which the structure
of a natural language whatever it is
it's valuable to you to me maybe not to
you just as yours is valuable to you but
not entirely to me but is this we have
to be very skeptical about these claims
of profundity because when examined they
don't always remain what they seem
they don't always remain that gentleman
let me name three names that all but
remade modern consciousness I think the
three of you would agree with that
formulation when you hear the names 19th
and early 20th century Karl Marx no
longer taken seriously I a few faculty
lounges in American Universities
fundamentally Karl Marx no longer taken
seriously Sigmund Freud fascinating a
few interesting insights but psychology
has now moved so far beyond Freud that
at universities across the country
they're renaming the department's the
department's of psychology and brain
sciences we're scanning brains we all
right and now we have Darwin and the
three of you are taking him down to what
does this mean for the way people think
about the world is this he won't go down
easily no one has taken down Friday is
every decade I'm with David Ronn Freud
Rises my Estonian feminists in this
1970s were outraged because of something
he said or didn't say
in a political way has nothing to do
with the value of his writing but I'm
right at two out of three marks and
Darwin certainly with marks in Darwin
Marx is kind of a windbag let's agree on
that and a bastard person yeah it didn't
Bay the whole lot certainly had no sense
of style
Darwin is a different case I think
you're under something to group them
together because you've talked about how
Darwinism David talked about how
Darwinism has become the foundation of a
worldview and if you look at the
questions that they address Marx Darwin
tells us where we came from Marx has a
utopian vision of the future and Freud
tells us what to do about our guilt in
between the three of these great
materialistic thinkers of the nineteenth
century and early 20th century they form
a the basis of a kind of comprehensive
materialistic worldview they answer all
the same questions that traditional
judeo-christian religion is addressed
and so it's understandable when we talk
about some of the the intense opposition
that Darwin's skeptics often face that
it's understandable when you realize
that you actually it makes sense because
you're challenging a fundamental plank
in the worldview of many of the
scientists many scientists equate their
worldview of scientific materialism with
the practice of science itself and when
you challenge one of the thinkers that
is that supports that worldview you're
going to get a very kind of emotive
reaction and that's often what happens
last question here and I'm going to
quote David Gill errant nerds that say
one final time Darwin now poses a final
challenge whether biology will rise to
this last one as well as it did to the
first when his theory upset every
applecart remains to be seen how cleanly
and quickly can the field get over
Darwin and move on
striking sentence this is one of the
most important questions facing science
in the 21st century close quote
is a generational does the whole
generation of biologists have to die
before the field gets over Darwin what's
going to happen here might be
generational at
best I mean I think I think that would
be a great outcome to have the old guard
died and and you bet but you know
religion is imparted more than anything
else by the parents to the children and
and and the young people have been
brought up as little Darwinists I mean
kids I see running around New Haven or
old Darwinist anyway the children I mean
the students in my class they're all
Darwinism
so I these guys know more about it than
I do I'm not what I think Darwin is
eternal because an eternal eternal the
name is eternal the ideas eternal the
beliefs the commitment they're all
eternal the theory will disappear in
good riddance to a bad theory but no
matter what's a beautiful theory all
right it's a beautiful theory whatever
it is it will disappear but whatever
replaces it will be called Darwinian no
doubt about that
no matter what Christian heresy emerges
in the tides of time it's always called
a Christian heresy this will be a
Darwinian heresy but that legacy that
commemorative legacy will never
disappear it's part of the history of
the subject just like Newton will not
disappear but Newton David clarity I'm
prepared for that one because I read
David Gardner's essay very carefully and
they of course be based on your work in
your work so but as as as this David
says look there's a range of physical
phenomena very big things planets stars
Newton isn't too good at that very tiny
things quantum mechanics tiny particles
we can say he's not too good at that but
this huge range Newton is perfectly
predictive it fits it comports
flawlessly with a with 98% of human
experience and Darwin doesn't have to go
farther oh I do yeah but I think what
David Berlinski is getting at is that
does help Darwinism has filled a niche
in our intellectual life that is
necessary you've got to have give some
kind of account of
where all these wonderfully intricate
systems we call living organisms came
from and the fundamental commitment of
Darwinism is is some kind of bottom-up
materialistic account where the
molecules get more complex and form
molecule more complex molecules and
cells and the cells compete to form more
complex organisms so now what we're
getting is post neo-darwinian theories
of evolution that are trying to provide
new mechanisms that will account for the
the things that the Darwinian mechanism
doesn't account for so even you who bear
the scars of abuse from Darwinists say
Darwin may have been mistaken in his
answers but he was asking invaluable
question he's asking invaluable
questions but I think he got it wrong I
think all Darwinian --zz in the broad
sense get it wrong they're trying to
explain something very very complex in
terms of bottom-up undirected processes
and what we see in life complex
miniature machines complex information
processing systems digital code these
are things that bear the hallmark of
mind and they suggest rather a top-down
instead of a bottom-up approach so I'm
sure people committed to a materialistic
view of things we'll continue to
generate bottom-up explanations but I
think we're in a new day we're looking
at life in light of our own high-tech
digital computing technologies and
realizing there's these systems bear all
the hallmarks of design let's start to
look at life differently and I think
looking at it from a bottom-up Darwinian
approaches holding science back we're
starting to make predictions based on
intelligent design we were some of some
of our guys were the first people to
predict that the non-coding regions of
the genome previously identified as junk
by the neo-darwinian x' have in fact are
in fact importantly functional and so
there's the looking at life as a design
system is actually yielding insights
into how life works it's a new day
you'll go with that yes sort of but
there's been big changes let's put it
this way I think what we have determined
is that Darwin created a 19th century
local theory without looking at extreme
cases that was reasonably successful for
breeders
for the explanation of local
characteristics like beak size or the
growth of wings but he entirely failed
to explain what he thought he was
explaining the emergence of biological
complexity on the species level or
higher order levels he wasn't a it was a
premature question to address an
audience about the Origin of Species he
couldn't say anything about what he did
not know what he could not comprehend
and the fact that he did not know or
could not comprehend these things is
simply a reflection of the fact that we
do not know or cannot comprehend those
things in the 21st century so the
question was the question addressed was
widely premature in the 19th century
it's still premature we're just learning
the structure of intellectual inquiry
necessary to understand something like
the biological cell and it's much harder
a problem than we ever suspected much
harder David giler
last word to you do you concur it is
much harder yeah absolutely it's a
fantastically difficult problem we'll
solve it but it's not gonna be simple
David choleric 'nor author most recently
of the tides of consciousness thank you
david Berlinski author of many but all
three of you author of many books but
author in this case the relevant volume
is the deniable darwin and other essays
and Steve Meyer whose book in this case
the relevant book is Darwin's doubt
thank you all thank you thank you my
friends I'm Peter Robinson for uncommon
knowledge the Hoover Institution and Fox
Nation thank you
[Music]
you